# UE1 04.10.2018

- [UE1 04.10.2018](#ue1-04102018)
    - [Unit 1](#unit-1)
        - [Checking the Docker installation](#checking-the-docker-installation)
            - [Task 1: Check the installed Docker client](#task-1-check-the-installed-docker-client)
            - [Task 2: Check the Docker system information](#task-2-check-the-docker-system-information)
        - [Working with containers and images](#working-with-containers-and-images)
            - [Task 1: Starting a container](#task-1-starting-a-container)
            - [Task 2: Explore the Docker objects](#task-2-explore-the-docker-objects)
            - [Task 3: Try to find the `hello-world image` and `pull` it](#task-3-try-to-find-the-hello-world-image-and-pull-it)
            - [Task 4: Create a container that is staying alive (in running state)](#task-4-create-a-container-that-is-staying-alive-in-running-state)
            - [Task 5: Let’s cleanup the objects we have created](#task-5-lets-cleanup-the-objects-we-have-created)

```bash
docker image pull alpine (1)
docker container run --name mycontainer alpine echo "Hello" (2)
docker container ls -a (3)
docker container rm mycontainer (4)
```

1. Pull the alpine image from the Docker Hub (a public registry).
2. Run a new container based on the image alpine and execute a command.
3. Show all Docker containers.
4. Delete Container

## Unit 1

Goal of this lab exercise is to start a Docker container running a sh shell and to examine what Docker components have been created and how these relate to each other.

### Checking the Docker installation

Before starting to work with Docker we make sure that we have a proper Docker client and daemon running

#### Task 1: Check the installed Docker client

```cmd
docker --version
```

#### Task 2: Check the Docker system information

```cmd
docker info
```

### Working with containers and images

#### Task 1: Starting a container

In this task we start a container using the command `docker container run …`​.

- **Note**  
    You can always ask the built-in Docker help using `docker --help` or `docker COMMAND --help`.

This is starting a container, executing a simple bash command, and removing the container after it is stopped.

```bash
docker container run --rm --name hello alpine sh -c "echo Hello"
```

#### Task 2: Explore the Docker objects

For the next task we explore the Docker object that eventually have been created. Try to figure out which container objects and image exist now.

1. How can we make the container we just created visible?  
   `docker run`
2. What is the state of the container we created?  
   `docker ps -a`
3. How do we get more details about a container or image?  
   `docker inspect`
4. How can we remove the container?  
   `docker rm`

Explore the `docker container` and the `docker image` command.

#### Task 3: Try to find the `hello-world image` and `pull` it

What did you notice during the pull, what exactly happened?

#### Task 4: Create a container that is staying alive (in running state)

In our earlier example we have started a container with a 'one-shot' command that terminated immediately. Now let’s try to start a container that will stay alive and keeps running in the background. As container command use `sh -c "while true; do sleep 10; echo 'Hello'; done"`.

Also work with the `docker container ls` and `docker container stats` commands.

#### Task 5: Let’s cleanup the objects we have created

1. Stop the container in case it is still running.
2. Remove the container
3. Remove the image
